Ephesians 4:30 has been selected
as the theme text for my comments this month.
Ephesians 4:30 says:
“Also, do not be grieving God’s holy spirit,
“with which you have been sealed
for a day of releasing by ransom.”
Well, what does it mean
to “be grieving God’s holy spirit”?
Before we discuss that,
let’s make clear
what grieving the spirit is not.
Grieving the holy spirit is not the same
as “blasphemy against the spirit.”
For that matter, grieving the spirit
is not necessarily the same
as a serious or gross sin.
What’s the difference
between these three expressions?
Mark 3:29 mentions
blasphemy against God’s holy spirit.
Notice what it says about this action:
“But whoever blasphemes
“against the holy spirit
“has no forgiveness forever
but is guilty of everlasting sin.”
Blasphemy against the spirit
is said to be an “everlasting sin.”
So it is that our publications
often use the terms
“blasphemy against the spirit”
and “sinning against the spirit”
interchangeably.
Matthew 12:31, 32 further expands
on our understanding of blasphemy
or sinning against the holy spirit.
This kind of sin is termed in these verses
as “unforgivable sin.”
Very serious indeed!
Matthew 12:31, 32 says:
“For this reason I say to you,
“every sort of sin and blasphemy
“will be forgiven men,
“but the blasphemy against the spirit
“will not be forgiven.
“For example, whoever speaks a word
“against the Son of man [that’s Jesus],
“it will be forgiven him;
“but whoever speaks against the holy spirit,
“it will not be forgiven him,
“no, not in this system of things
nor in that to come.”
A most tragic prospect
for any who sin against the holy spirit.
Well, what kind of sin might that be?
Well, first of all,
you notice in verse 31 Jesus said:
“Every sort of sin . . . will be forgiven.”
Even very serious, gross sin,
can be forgiven.
So if you have sinned in the past,
in a very serious way,
you’re not at all a lost cause.
You see, Jehovah is merciful.
If we sin and we’re truly repentant,
even if we’ve been severely disciplined,
we can be forgiven.
For the verse said:
“Every sort of sin . . . will be forgiven.”
In fact,
did you notice Jesus’ further statement?
He said that a person
who speaks against Jesus
has the possibility of being forgiven,
whereas one who blasphemes
against the holy spirit
will not be forgiven—forever.
Why is that?
The reason is that holy spirit
has God as its very Source.
The holy spirit is expressive
of God’s own personality.
So saying things against
or denying the holy spirit
is the same as speaking
against Jehovah himself.
Now, Jesus was here referring
to those who willfully, deliberately opposed
an operation of God’s holy spirit.
Well, do we have an example
of some who did just that,
they blasphemed or sinned
against the holy spirit?
Look back in the context of Jesus’ statement
in Matthew chapter 12.
Jesus had used the power of the holy spirit
to cure a man.
Notice how the Jewish religious leaders spoke
against that obvious, miraculous use
of holy spirit.
Matthew 12:22 first,
it says: “Then they brought him
“a demon-possessed man
“who was blind and speechless,
“and he cured him,
“so that the speechless man
could speak and see.”
That was indisputable evidence
of the operation of Jehovah’s holy spirit.
The crowds recognized that.
The Pharisees did not.
Well, let’s read verses 23 and 24:
“Well, all the crowds were astounded
“and began to say:
“‘May this not perhaps be the Son of David?’
“At hearing this, the Pharisees said:
“‘This fellow does not expel the demons
“‘except by means of Beelzebub,
the ruler of the demons.’”
Instead of acknowledging
the power of Jehovah’s holy spirit,
many Pharisees spoke against it,
attributing the healing of the man
to Satan the Devil himself.
Consider also the case of Judas Iscariot.
He betrayed Jesus for 30 pieces of silver.
Consider, when Jesus
came down to earth as a human,
that was a manifestation of the power
of Jehovah’s holy spirit.
Judas arranged for His death.
That is why at John 17:12,
Jesus called him
“the son of destruction.”
Judas sinned against the spirit.
He poisoned his relationship with Jehovah,
a sin that could never be canceled out.
Irreversible!
So blaspheming the holy spirit
is related more to the motive,
the heart condition,
the degree of willfulness,
more so than to a specific type of sin.
But that is not for us to judge.
Jehovah knows who is worthy of a resurrection
and who is not.
Well, clearly,
we do not even want to come close
to sinning against Jehovah’s holy spirit,
as did Judas
and some of the false religious leaders
in the first century.
Let’s change now to another expression,
“serious” or “gross” sin.
What is that,
and how does it differ
from sinning against the spirit?
And then we will see how it also differs
from “grieving God’s holy spirit.”
Well, serious or gross sin most often refers
to violating one of Jehovah’s moral standards
—sins such as sexual immorality, idolatry,
thievery, extortion, murder, spiritism.
If a person is not repentant,
these sins are serious enough
that a person could be expelled
from the congregation.
Hence, we refer to these
as “serious” or “gross” sins.
However, unlike sinning against the spirit
—unforgivable sin—
a person who commits a serious sin
can be retained in the congregation
or restored to it
if the person ceases the wrong
and is repentant.
Jehovah’s mercy
can cover over even a very serious sin
that has been properly addressed.
Forgiveness is possible.
Remember, Jesus said:
‘Every sort of sin can be forgiven.’
Well, we’ve talked
about sinning against the spirit
—willfully denying
a manifestation of Jehovah’s holy spirit.
No forgiveness is possible.
We just mentioned “serious” or “gross” sin.
As imperfect humans,
we can succumb
to a violation of one of God’s moral laws.
Though very serious, we can recover.
Well, let’s go back to our theme text again,
Ephesians 4:30.
It reads: “Also, do not be grieving
“God’s holy spirit,
“with which you have been sealed
for a day of releasing by ransom.”
Grieving the spirit is different
than sinning against the spirit.
It’s also different from serious sin.
Our motto is:
Follow the lead of the spirit,
do not grieve the spirit.
To illustrate:
Suppose you are following another vehicle
on a trip to a paradisaical resort.
You do not know the precise directions,
but no problem.
The vehicle in front of you
is from the resort
and will lead the way.
Well, you started off very well,
carefully following the car mile after mile.
When it changes lanes, you change lanes.
When it speeds up, you speed up.
But what would happen
if you failed to stay alert?
Well, you could lag behind considerably.
Or possibly you notice that the lead car
has moved over into the far left lane,
but you stay in the far right lane.
Without even realizing it,
your lane turns into an exit-only lane
and suddenly you’re no longer following
the lead car.
You’re off on some other roadway.
Well, all of us are, in effect,
on a highway of holiness.
We’re en route to our paradisaical promises.
We follow the lead of the holy spirit.
Initially, grieving the holy spirit
does not necessarily involve
a serious or gross sin.
A gross sin could be likened to driving
on the same road as the holy spirit,
but in the opposite direction.
And, oh, in the same lane.
So gross sin is, in effect,
on a collision course with God’s spirit,
whereas grieving the spirit
initially may not be so obvious.
We’re still heading
in the same general direction
as the spirit’s leading,
but it is as if we took an exit ramp.
Now, an exit ramp
initially is just a slight veer
off the highway.
At first, it appears you’re still going
in the same direction as the lead car,
but eventually, what happens?
The veer widens.
The ramp may come to a stop sign.
Now what?
If we turn right or left, you see,
we’re no longer being led by the spirit.
We’re on a different road.
The footnote in verse 30
on the word “grieving,”
indicates that this could be translated
do not “cause sorrow to” God’s spirit.
It’s not as if Jehovah
is bitterly angry at us
for this initial deviation,
but he is saddened by our course of conduct.
Well, what might be some examples
of grieving the spirit?
Let’s review the verses
prior to that expression,
which surface in verse 30.
Let’s take a look at verses 25-29.
“Therefore,
“now that you have put away deceit,
“each one of you speak truth
“with his neighbor,
“because we are members
belonging to one another.”
Did you notice that it said:
“We are members belonging to one another”?
We’re fellow worshippers.
Deceitful words and actions
can disrupt the unity of the congregation.
Deceit is not following
the lead of the holy spirit.
We would be disappointing Jehovah,
and this could lead
to even more serious sin.
Ephesians 4:26
—what’s another way
to grieve the holy spirit?
Ephesians 4:26 says:
“Be wrathful [that happens],
“but do not sin;
do not let the sun set
while you are still angry.”
Well, the verse makes clear
that getting angry is not the sin,
even Jehovah can get angry.
For us humans, it’s staying angry
that could grieve the spirit.
One brother said that he and his wife
have taken to heart the counsel:
“Do not let the sun set
while you are still angry.”
However, he admits
there have been some very long sunsets.
So when angered, what should we do?
Say a silent prayer
asking that you display self-control.
Change lanes,
closely following the spirit’s lead.
What might be yet another way
we could grieve the spirit?
A slight veer if not corrected,
could put us on another roadway altogether.
Ephesians 4:28:
“Let the one who steals steal no more;
“rather, let him do hard work,
“doing good work with his hands,
“so that he may have something to share
with someone in need.”
Actual outright stealing
—robbing a bank—
is more than grieving the spirit.
That is a serious sin
—on a collision course with the spirit.
But are we closely following the spirit,
in principle?
For example, Hebrews 13:18 says:
“We wish to conduct ourselves honestly
in all things.”
On the job, do we take liberties?
Do we “borrow” disposable items
from the company?
Do we put in a full day of work,
not stealing time from our employer?
Honesty is the best policy;
it’s following the spirit closely,
in the correct lane,
at the right speed,
on the highway of holiness.
Well, is there another exit
from the highway of holiness
we will want to avoid?
Ephesians 4:29:
“Let a rotten word
“[so we can grieve the spirit
simply by words uttered—let a rotten word]
“not come out of your mouth,
“but only what is good for building up
“as the need may be,
to impart what is beneficial to the hearers.”
God’s spirit enables us to guard our speech.
When frustrated or under duress,
do we resort to inappropriate expressions?
Euphemisms, perhaps.
A euphemism is defined
as ‘the substitution of a less offensive word
for one that is harsh, crude, offensive.’
We grieve the spirit
by resorting to unwholesome speech.
How about Matthew 5:28?
Jesus said:
“But I say to you that everyone who
“keeps on looking at a woman
“so as to have a passion for her
“has already committed adultery with her
in his heart.”
He said,
‘has committed adultery in his heart,’
not the literal act at this point,
not yet a serious sin,
but ‘looking at the woman
and developing passion for her.’
For example, viewing pornography
can be a grieving of the holy spirit.
We are saddening Jehovah,
and at some point
we become distasteful to him.
As Jesus said, this can lead to serious sin.
Why, even the type of pornography
and the frequency of viewing it
can become a serious sin in itself.
Well, how else do we avoid
grieving God’s spirit?
Avoiding hurtful gossip,
cooperating with the elders,
not forming cliques in the congregation,
these are all ways that we demonstrate
that we follow the spirit’s lead.
Ephesians 4:30 again, it says:
“Also, do not be grieving God’s holy spirit,
“with which you have been sealed
for a day of releasing by ransom.”
Well, let’s review.
We invite our waiters to join us.
They have some props
they’re going to set up for us.
And this is
Brett Cox and Michael Banks.
In case you’re wondering,
they are not real Bethel waiters.
Instead, they both work as secretaries
in the office of the Teaching Committee,
but we’ve impressed them into service today.
Thank you, Brett and Michael.
In case you were thinking it,
this is not a Watchtower cooking show.
Instead, we’ve prepared
a visual review of the material
we just discussed
about “grieving God’s holy spirit.”
We have three beautiful loaves of bread here.
This is garlic powder.
This is basic old mud.
This represents poison,
and we have a trash can.
Now, the bread represents
the relationship
that three people have with Jehovah.
First Samuel 16:7 says
that “mere man sees
“what appears to the eyes,
but Jehovah sees into the heart.”
Yes, Jehovah sees
what we are on the inside,
and he knows exactly
the status of our relationship with him.
Well, as you can see,
all three loaves are pure, clean,
and undefiled in any way.
This represents the clean relationship
Adam originally had with Jehovah
and that all humans were intended to enjoy.
The sin of Adam
tainted our pure relationship with Jehovah.
The garlic powder represents
inherited sin and imperfection
that was passed on to all humans.
Now, the garlic powder is not poison.
The bread is still edible,
but it’s no longer pure.
In a similar way,
though we’re tainted with sin,
Jehovah does not discard imperfect humans.
He still allows us
to have a relationship with him
based on Jesus’ sacrifice.
Well, let’s review our material.
First, sinning against the spirit.
What I’m holding represents poison,
and when the Pharisees denied
an outright manifestation of the holy spirit,
it was as if they rejected Jehovah himself.
Their actions
were like pouring poison on the bread.
It totally saturates the bread.
This bread is ruined.
When Jehovah determines
that someone has sinned against the spirit,
there’s no forgiveness possible.
That one’s relationship with Jehovah
has been forever ruined.
Jehovah discards the person
like a piece of garbage,
just like Judas, “the son of destruction.”
Well, second, let’s review
what serious or gross sin
generally refers to.
If we drop the bread into the mud,
it becomes soiled.
Serious sin is
when we break one of Jehovah’s moral laws,
like the sins listed at 1 Corinthians 6:10.
Serious sin muddies or soils
our relationship with Jehovah.
Our first reaction might be,
this bread is ruined too,
and we reach for the trash can again.
Well, it’s true that serious sin
has sullied our relationship with Jehovah,
but is serious sin the same
as sinning against the spirit,
fit only for the trash can?
No, you see, a person
can be repentant over a serious sin.
He ceases the wrong conduct,
prays for forgiveness,
talks to the elders,
and follows Jehovah’s procedure
to become clean again.
In effect, the mud is cut away,
and to Jehovah
that serious sin of the past is forever gone.
He doesn’t think about it again.
What’s left?
Unsoiled garlic bread.
We still have imperfection,
we’re tainted with that,
but we again have a good relationship
with Jehovah.
Now, third,
how can we illustrate grieving the spirit?
You remember grieving the spirit is
drifting away from the lead of the spirit.
You recall,
Ephesians 4:25-29 listed such things
as deceitfulness, continued anger,
inappropriate speech.
So grieving the spirit is not like
the poison of sinning against the spirit,
and it’s not necessarily like
the mud of serious sin.
Grieving the spirit might be likened to
putting on more layers of garlic powder.
This does not immediately damage
our relationship with Jehovah,
but if we continue to veer away
from the leading of God’s spirit,
we sadden him.
We grieve the spirit.
So, what should we do?
Stop our inappropriate behavior
and pray for forgiveness.
And we must shake off
any remnants of such traits from our person.
Though we’re still imperfect,
we can again have
a wholesome relationship with Jehovah.